docs/src/instance_manager.md, before:

---
id: instance_manager
sidebar_position: 110
title: Postgres Instance Manager
---

# Postgres instance manager
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

CloudNativePG does not rely on an external tool for failover management.
It simply relies on the Kubernetes API server and a native key component called:
the **Postgres instance manager**.

The instance manager takes care of the entire lifecycle of the PostgreSQL
server process (also known as `postmaster`).

When you create a new cluster, the operator makes a Pod per instance.
The field `.spec.instances` specifies how many instances to create.

Each Pod will start the instance manager as the parent process (PID 1) for the
main container, which in turn runs the PostgreSQL instance. During the lifetime
of the Pod, the instance manager acts as a backend to handle the
[startup, liveness and readiness probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#container-probes).

## Startup Probe

The startup probe ensures that a PostgreSQL instance, whether a primary or
standby, has fully started.

:::info
    By default, the startup probe uses
    [`pg_isready`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pg-isready.html).
    However, the behavior can be customized by specifying a different startup
    strategy.
:::

While the startup probe is running, the liveness and readiness probes remain
disabled. Following Kubernetes standards, if the startup probe fails, the
kubelet will terminate the container, which will then be restarted.

The `.spec.startDelay` parameter specifies the maximum time, in seconds,
allowed for the startup probe to succeed.

By default, the `startDelay` is set to `3600` seconds. It is recommended to
adjust this setting based on the time PostgreSQL needs to fully initialize in
your specific environment.

:::warning
    Setting `.spec.startDelay` too low can cause the liveness probe to activate
    prematurely, potentially resulting in unnecessary Pod restarts if PostgreSQL
    hasn’t fully initialized.
:::

CloudNativePG configures the startup probe with the following default parameters:

```yaml
failureThreshold: FAILURE_THRESHOLD
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

The `failureThreshold` value is automatically calculated by dividing
`startDelay` by `periodSeconds`.

You can customize any of the probe settings in the `.spec.probes.startup`
section of your configuration.

:::warning
    Be sure that any custom probe settings are tailored to your cluster's
    operational requirements to avoid unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more details on probe configuration, refer to the
    [probe API documentation](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probewithstrategy).
:::

If you manually specify `.spec.probes.startup.failureThreshold`, it will
override the default behavior and disable the automatic use of `startDelay`.

For example, the following configuration explicitly sets custom probe
parameters, bypassing `startDelay`:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    startup:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

### Startup Probe Strategy

In certain scenarios, you may need to customize the startup strategy for your
PostgreSQL cluster. For example, you might delay marking a replica as started
until it begins streaming from the primary or define a replication lag
threshold that must be met before considering the replica ready.

To accommodate these requirements, CloudNativePG extends the
`.spec.probes.startup` stanza with two optional parameters:

- `type`: specifies the criteria for considering the probe successful. Accepted
  values, in increasing order of complexity/depth, include:

    - `pg_isready`: marks the probe as successful when the `pg_isready` command
      exits with `0`. This is the default for primary instances and replicas.
    - `query`: marks the probe as successful when a basic query is executed on
      the `postgres` database locally.
    - `streaming`: marks the probe as successful when the replica begins
      streaming from its source and meets the specified lag requirements (details
      below).

- `maximumLag`: defines the maximum acceptable replication lag, measured in bytes
  (expressed as Kubernetes quantities). This parameter is only applicable when
  `type` is set to `streaming`. If `maximumLag` is not specified, the replica is
  considered successfully started as soon as it begins streaming.

:::info[Important]
    The `.spec.probes.startup.maximumLag` option is validated and enforced only
    during the startup phase of the pod, meaning it applies exclusively when the
    replica is starting.
:::

:::warning
    Incorrect configuration of the `maximumLag` option can cause continuous
    failures of the startup probe, leading to repeated replica restarts. Ensure
    you understand how this option works and configure appropriate values for
    `failureThreshold` and `periodSeconds` to give the replica enough time to
    catch up with its source.
:::

The following example requires a replica to have a maximum lag of 16Mi from the
source to be considered started:

```yaml
# <snip>
probes:
  startup:
    type: streaming
    maximumLag: 16Mi
```

## Liveness Probe

The liveness probe begins after the startup probe successfully completes. Its
primary role is to ensure the PostgreSQL instance manager is operating
correctly.

Following Kubernetes standards, if the liveness probe fails, the kubelet will
terminate the container, which will then be restarted.

The amount of time before a Pod is classified as not alive is configurable via
the `.spec.livenessProbeTimeout` parameter.

CloudNativePG configures the liveness probe with the following default
parameters:

```yaml
failureThreshold: FAILURE_THRESHOLD
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

The `failureThreshold` value is automatically calculated by dividing
`livenessProbeTimeout` by `periodSeconds`.

By default, `.spec.livenessProbeTimeout` is set to `30` seconds. This means the
liveness probe will report a failure if it detects three consecutive probe
failures, with a 10-second interval between each check.

You can customize any of the probe settings in the `.spec.probes.liveness`
section of your configuration.

:::warning
    Be sure that any custom probe settings are tailored to your cluster's
    operational requirements to avoid unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more details on probe configuration, refer to the
    [probe API documentation](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probe).
:::

If you manually specify `.spec.probes.liveness.failureThreshold`, it will
override the default behavior and disable the automatic use of
`livenessProbeTimeout`.

For example, the following configuration explicitly sets custom probe
parameters, bypassing `livenessProbeTimeout`:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

### Primary Isolation

CloudNativePG 1.27 introduces an additional behavior for the liveness
probe of a PostgreSQL primary, which will report a failure if **both** of the
following conditions are met:

1. The instance manager cannot reach the Kubernetes API server
2. The instance manager cannot reach **any** other instance via the instance manager’s REST API

The effect of this behavior is to consider an isolated primary to be not alive and subsequently **shut it down** when the liveness probe fails.

It is **enabled by default** and can be disabled by adding the following:

```yaml
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      isolationCheck:
        enabled: false
```

:::info[Important]
    Be aware that the default liveness probe settings—automatically derived from `livenessProbeTimeout`—might
    be aggressive (30 seconds). As such, we recommend explicitly setting the
    liveness probe configuration to suit your environment.
:::

The spec also accepts two optional network settings: `requestTimeout`
and `connectionTimeout`, both defaulting to `1000` (in milliseconds).
In cloud environments, you may need to increase these values.
For example:

```yaml
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      isolationCheck:
        enabled: true
        requestTimeout: "2000"
        connectionTimeout: "2000"
```

## Readiness Probe

The readiness probe starts once the startup probe has successfully completed.
Its primary purpose is to check whether the PostgreSQL instance is ready to
accept traffic and serve requests at any point during the pod's lifecycle.

:::info
    By default, the readiness probe uses
    [`pg_isready`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pg-isready.html).
    However, the behavior can be customized by specifying a different readiness
    strategy.
:::

Following Kubernetes standards, if the readiness probe fails, the pod will be
marked unready and will not receive traffic from any services. An unready pod
is also ineligible for promotion during automated failover scenarios.

CloudNativePG uses the following default configuration for the readiness probe:

```yaml
failureThreshold: 3
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

If the default settings do not suit your requirements, you can fully customize
the readiness probe by specifying parameters in the `.spec.probes.readiness`
stanza. For example:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    readiness:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

:::warning
    Ensure that any custom probe settings are aligned with your cluster’s
    operational requirements to prevent unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more information on configuring probes, see the
    [probe API](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probewithstrategy).
:::

### Readiness Probe Strategy

In certain scenarios, you may need to customize the readiness strategy for your
cluster. For example, you might delay marking a replica as ready until it
begins streaming from the primary or define a maximum replication lag threshold
before considering the replica ready.

To accommodate these requirements, CloudNativePG extends the
`.spec.probes.readiness` stanza with two optional parameters: `type` and
`maximumLag`. Please refer to the [Startup Probe Strategy](#startup-probe-strategy)
section for detailed information on these options.

:::info[Important]
    Unlike the startup probe, the `.spec.probes.readiness.maximumLag` option is
    continuously monitored. A lagging replica may become unready if this setting is
    not appropriately tuned.
:::

:::warning
    Incorrect configuration of the `maximumLag` option can lead to repeated
    readiness probe failures, causing serious consequences, such as:

    - Exclusion of the replica from key operator features, such as promotion
      during failover or participation in synchronous replication quorum.
    - Disruptions in read/read-only services.
    - In longer failover times scenarios, replicas might be declared unready,
      leading to a cluster stall requiring manual intervention.
:::

:::note[Recommendation]
    Use the `streaming` and `maximumLag` options with extreme caution. If
    you're unfamiliar with PostgreSQL replication, rely on the default
    strategy. Seek professional advice if unsure.
:::

The following example requires a replica to have a maximum lag of 64Mi from the
source to be considered ready. It also provides approximately 300 seconds (30
failures × 10 seconds) for the startup probe to succeed:

```yaml
# <snip>
probes:
  readiness:
    type: streaming
    maximumLag: 64Mi
    failureThreshold: 30
    periodSeconds: 10
```

## Shutdown control

When a Pod running Postgres is deleted, either manually or by Kubernetes
following a node drain operation, the kubelet will send a termination signal to the
instance manager, and the instance manager will take care of shutting down
PostgreSQL in an appropriate way.
The `.spec.smartShutdownTimeout` and `.spec.stopDelay` options, expressed in seconds,
control the amount of time given to PostgreSQL to shut down. The values default
to 180 and 1800 seconds, respectively.

The shutdown procedure is composed of two steps:

1. The instance manager first issues a `CHECKPOINT`, then initiates a **smart**
shut down, disallowing any new connection to PostgreSQL. This step will last
for up to `.spec.smartShutdownTimeout` seconds.

2. If PostgreSQL is still up, the instance manager requests a **fast**
shut down, terminating any existing connection and exiting promptly.
If the instance is archiving and/or streaming WAL files, the process
will wait for up to the remaining time set in `.spec.stopDelay` to complete the
operation and then forcibly shut down. Such a timeout needs to be at least 15
seconds.

:::info[Important]
    In order to avoid any data loss in the Postgres cluster, which impacts
    the database [RPO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology), don't delete the Pod where
    the primary instance is running. In this case, perform a switchover to
    another instance first.
:::

### Shutdown of the primary during a switchover

During a switchover, the shutdown procedure slightly differs from the general
case. The instance manager of the former primary first issues a `CHECKPOINT`,
then initiates a **fast** shutdown of PostgreSQL before the designated new
primary is promoted, ensuring that all data are safely available on the new
primary.

For this reason, the `.spec.switchoverDelay`, expressed in seconds, controls
the  time given to the former primary to shut down gracefully and archive all
the WAL files. By default it is set to `3600` (1 hour).

:::warning
    The `.spec.switchoverDelay` option affects the [RPO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology)
    and [RTO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology) of your PostgreSQL database. Setting it to
    a low value, might favor RTO over RPO but lead to data loss at cluster level
    and/or backup level. On the contrary, setting it to a high value, might remove
    the risk of data loss while leaving the cluster without an active primary for a
    longer time during the switchover.
:::

## Failover

In case of primary pod failure, the cluster will go into failover mode.
Please refer to the ["Failover" section](failover.md) for details.

## Disk Full Failure

Storage exhaustion is a well known issue for PostgreSQL clusters.
The [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/diskusage.html#DISK-FULL)
highlights the possible failure scenarios and the importance of monitoring disk
usage to prevent it from becoming full.

The same applies to CloudNativePG and Kubernetes as well: the
["Monitoring" section](monitoring.md#predefined-set-of-metrics)
provides details on checking the disk space used by WAL segments and standard
metrics on disk usage exported to Prometheus.

:::info[Important]
    In a production system, it is critical to monitor the database
    continuously. Exhausted disk storage can lead to a database server shutdown.
:::

:::note
    The detection of exhausted storage relies on a storage class that
    accurately reports disk size and usage. This may not be the case in simulated
    Kubernetes environments like Kind or with test storage class implementations
    such as `csi-driver-host-path`.
:::

If the disk containing the WALs becomes full and no more WAL segments can be
stored, PostgreSQL will stop working. CloudNativePG correctly detects this issue
by verifying that there is enough space to store the next WAL segment,
and avoids triggering a failover, which could complicate recovery.

That allows a human administrator to address the root cause.

In such a case, if supported by the storage class, the quickest course of action
is currently to:

1. Expand the storage size of the full PVC
2. Increase the size in the `Cluster` resource to the same value

Once the issue is resolved and there is sufficient free space for WAL segments,
the Pod will restart and the cluster will become healthy.

See also the ["Volume expansion" section](storage.md#volume-expansion) of the
documentation.

Commit message:

docs: clarify relationship between failoverDelay and smartShutdownTimeout parameters
Enhance documentation for spec.failoverDelay and spec.smartShutdownTimeout
to explain that smartShutdownTimeout must be significantly smaller than
failoverDelay to prevent premature failover during controlled shutdown
operations. Add recommended 5:1 ratio guidance across all documentation
locations including API types, CRD, failover docs, and instance manager
docs.

Add critical explanation of split-brain scenarios that can occur when smart shutdown
fails due to open transactions blocking the shutdown process. Clarify that premature
failover can lead to two primaries operating simultaneously, causing data inconsistency
and potential corruption. Enhanced documentation across API types, CRD, failover docs,
instance manager docs, and API reference with detailed split-brain prevention guidance
and recommended 5:1 ratio between failoverDelay and smartShutdownTimeout.

Signed-off-by: thomas.boussekey <thomas.boussekey@mirakl.com>

docs/src/instance_manager.md, after:

---
id: instance_manager
sidebar_position: 110
title: Postgres Instance Manager
---

# Postgres instance manager
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

CloudNativePG does not rely on an external tool for failover management.
It simply relies on the Kubernetes API server and a native key component called:
the **Postgres instance manager**.

The instance manager takes care of the entire lifecycle of the PostgreSQL
server process (also known as `postmaster`).

When you create a new cluster, the operator makes a Pod per instance.
The field `.spec.instances` specifies how many instances to create.

Each Pod will start the instance manager as the parent process (PID 1) for the
main container, which in turn runs the PostgreSQL instance. During the lifetime
of the Pod, the instance manager acts as a backend to handle the
[startup, liveness and readiness probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#container-probes).

## Startup Probe

The startup probe ensures that a PostgreSQL instance, whether a primary or
standby, has fully started.

:::info
    By default, the startup probe uses
    [`pg_isready`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pg-isready.html).
    However, the behavior can be customized by specifying a different startup
    strategy.
:::

While the startup probe is running, the liveness and readiness probes remain
disabled. Following Kubernetes standards, if the startup probe fails, the
kubelet will terminate the container, which will then be restarted.

The `.spec.startDelay` parameter specifies the maximum time, in seconds,
allowed for the startup probe to succeed.

By default, the `startDelay` is set to `3600` seconds. It is recommended to
adjust this setting based on the time PostgreSQL needs to fully initialize in
your specific environment.

:::warning
    Setting `.spec.startDelay` too low can cause the liveness probe to activate
    prematurely, potentially resulting in unnecessary Pod restarts if PostgreSQL
    hasn’t fully initialized.
:::

CloudNativePG configures the startup probe with the following default parameters:

```yaml
failureThreshold: FAILURE_THRESHOLD
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

The `failureThreshold` value is automatically calculated by dividing
`startDelay` by `periodSeconds`.

You can customize any of the probe settings in the `.spec.probes.startup`
section of your configuration.

:::warning
    Be sure that any custom probe settings are tailored to your cluster's
    operational requirements to avoid unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more details on probe configuration, refer to the
    [probe API documentation](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probewithstrategy).
:::

If you manually specify `.spec.probes.startup.failureThreshold`, it will
override the default behavior and disable the automatic use of `startDelay`.

For example, the following configuration explicitly sets custom probe
parameters, bypassing `startDelay`:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    startup:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

### Startup Probe Strategy

In certain scenarios, you may need to customize the startup strategy for your
PostgreSQL cluster. For example, you might delay marking a replica as started
until it begins streaming from the primary or define a replication lag
threshold that must be met before considering the replica ready.

To accommodate these requirements, CloudNativePG extends the
`.spec.probes.startup` stanza with two optional parameters:

- `type`: specifies the criteria for considering the probe successful. Accepted
  values, in increasing order of complexity/depth, include:

    - `pg_isready`: marks the probe as successful when the `pg_isready` command
      exits with `0`. This is the default for primary instances and replicas.
    - `query`: marks the probe as successful when a basic query is executed on
      the `postgres` database locally.
    - `streaming`: marks the probe as successful when the replica begins
      streaming from its source and meets the specified lag requirements (details
      below).

- `maximumLag`: defines the maximum acceptable replication lag, measured in bytes
  (expressed as Kubernetes quantities). This parameter is only applicable when
  `type` is set to `streaming`. If `maximumLag` is not specified, the replica is
  considered successfully started as soon as it begins streaming.

:::info[Important]
    The `.spec.probes.startup.maximumLag` option is validated and enforced only
    during the startup phase of the pod, meaning it applies exclusively when the
    replica is starting.
:::

:::warning
    Incorrect configuration of the `maximumLag` option can cause continuous
    failures of the startup probe, leading to repeated replica restarts. Ensure
    you understand how this option works and configure appropriate values for
    `failureThreshold` and `periodSeconds` to give the replica enough time to
    catch up with its source.
:::

The following example requires a replica to have a maximum lag of 16Mi from the
source to be considered started:

```yaml
# <snip>
probes:
  startup:
    type: streaming
    maximumLag: 16Mi
```

## Liveness Probe

The liveness probe begins after the startup probe successfully completes. Its
primary role is to ensure the PostgreSQL instance manager is operating
correctly.

Following Kubernetes standards, if the liveness probe fails, the kubelet will
terminate the container, which will then be restarted.

The amount of time before a Pod is classified as not alive is configurable via
the `.spec.livenessProbeTimeout` parameter.

CloudNativePG configures the liveness probe with the following default
parameters:

```yaml
failureThreshold: FAILURE_THRESHOLD
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

The `failureThreshold` value is automatically calculated by dividing
`livenessProbeTimeout` by `periodSeconds`.

By default, `.spec.livenessProbeTimeout` is set to `30` seconds. This means the
liveness probe will report a failure if it detects three consecutive probe
failures, with a 10-second interval between each check.

You can customize any of the probe settings in the `.spec.probes.liveness`
section of your configuration.

:::warning
    Be sure that any custom probe settings are tailored to your cluster's
    operational requirements to avoid unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more details on probe configuration, refer to the
    [probe API documentation](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probe).
:::

If you manually specify `.spec.probes.liveness.failureThreshold`, it will
override the default behavior and disable the automatic use of
`livenessProbeTimeout`.

For example, the following configuration explicitly sets custom probe
parameters, bypassing `livenessProbeTimeout`:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

### Primary Isolation

CloudNativePG 1.27 introduces an additional behavior for the liveness
probe of a PostgreSQL primary, which will report a failure if **both** of the
following conditions are met:

1. The instance manager cannot reach the Kubernetes API server
2. The instance manager cannot reach **any** other instance via the instance manager’s REST API

The effect of this behavior is to consider an isolated primary to be not alive and subsequently **shut it down** when the liveness probe fails.

It is **enabled by default** and can be disabled by adding the following:

```yaml
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      isolationCheck:
        enabled: false
```

:::info[Important]
    Be aware that the default liveness probe settings—automatically derived from `livenessProbeTimeout`—might
    be aggressive (30 seconds). As such, we recommend explicitly setting the
    liveness probe configuration to suit your environment.
:::

The spec also accepts two optional network settings: `requestTimeout`
and `connectionTimeout`, both defaulting to `1000` (in milliseconds).
In cloud environments, you may need to increase these values.
For example:

```yaml
spec:
  probes:
    liveness:
      isolationCheck:
        enabled: true
        requestTimeout: "2000"
        connectionTimeout: "2000"
```

## Readiness Probe

The readiness probe starts once the startup probe has successfully completed.
Its primary purpose is to check whether the PostgreSQL instance is ready to
accept traffic and serve requests at any point during the pod's lifecycle.

:::info
    By default, the readiness probe uses
    [`pg_isready`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pg-isready.html).
    However, the behavior can be customized by specifying a different readiness
    strategy.
:::

Following Kubernetes standards, if the readiness probe fails, the pod will be
marked unready and will not receive traffic from any services. An unready pod
is also ineligible for promotion during automated failover scenarios.

CloudNativePG uses the following default configuration for the readiness probe:

```yaml
failureThreshold: 3
periodSeconds: 10
successThreshold: 1
timeoutSeconds: 5
```

If the default settings do not suit your requirements, you can fully customize
the readiness probe by specifying parameters in the `.spec.probes.readiness`
stanza. For example:

```yaml
# ... snip
spec:
  probes:
    readiness:
      periodSeconds: 3
      timeoutSeconds: 3
      failureThreshold: 10
```

:::warning
    Ensure that any custom probe settings are aligned with your cluster’s
    operational requirements to prevent unintended disruptions.
:::

:::info
    For more information on configuring probes, see the
    [probe API](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#probewithstrategy).
:::

### Readiness Probe Strategy

In certain scenarios, you may need to customize the readiness strategy for your
cluster. For example, you might delay marking a replica as ready until it
begins streaming from the primary or define a maximum replication lag threshold
before considering the replica ready.

To accommodate these requirements, CloudNativePG extends the
`.spec.probes.readiness` stanza with two optional parameters: `type` and
`maximumLag`. Please refer to the [Startup Probe Strategy](#startup-probe-strategy)
section for detailed information on these options.

:::info[Important]
    Unlike the startup probe, the `.spec.probes.readiness.maximumLag` option is
    continuously monitored. A lagging replica may become unready if this setting is
    not appropriately tuned.
:::

:::warning
    Incorrect configuration of the `maximumLag` option can lead to repeated
    readiness probe failures, causing serious consequences, such as:

    - Exclusion of the replica from key operator features, such as promotion
      during failover or participation in synchronous replication quorum.
    - Disruptions in read/read-only services.
    - In longer failover times scenarios, replicas might be declared unready,
      leading to a cluster stall requiring manual intervention.
:::

:::note[Recommendation]
    Use the `streaming` and `maximumLag` options with extreme caution. If
    you're unfamiliar with PostgreSQL replication, rely on the default
    strategy. Seek professional advice if unsure.
:::

The following example requires a replica to have a maximum lag of 64Mi from the
source to be considered ready. It also provides approximately 300 seconds (30
failures × 10 seconds) for the startup probe to succeed:

```yaml
# <snip>
probes:
  readiness:
    type: streaming
    maximumLag: 64Mi
    failureThreshold: 30
    periodSeconds: 10
```

## Shutdown control

When a Pod running Postgres is deleted, either manually or by Kubernetes
following a node drain operation, the kubelet will send a termination signal to the
instance manager, and the instance manager will take care of shutting down
PostgreSQL in an appropriate way.
The `.spec.smartShutdownTimeout` and `.spec.stopDelay` options, expressed in seconds,
control the amount of time given to PostgreSQL to shut down. The values default
to 180 and 1800 seconds, respectively.

:::warning[Important Relationship with failoverDelay]
The `.spec.smartShutdownTimeout` value must be significantly smaller than `.spec.failoverDelay`
to prevent premature failover during controlled shutdown operations. A recommended
ratio is at least 1:5, meaning `smartShutdownTimeout` should not exceed 20% of `failoverDelay`.
This ensures that planned shutdowns complete before the cluster considers the instance
unhealthy and triggers a failover.

### Preventing Split-Brain Scenarios

This relationship is critical to prevent **split-brain scenarios** that can occur when:

1. **Smart shutdown fails** due to open transactions blocking the shutdown process
2. **The primary remains running** but is unable to accept new connections during the smart shutdown attempt
3. **Failover triggers prematurely** because `failoverDelay` is too short
4. **Two primaries operate simultaneously** - the original primary (still running but blocked) and the newly promoted replica

When smart shutdown fails due to long-running transactions, PostgreSQL waits for those transactions to complete before proceeding. If `failoverDelay` expires during this waiting period, the cluster may incorrectly assume the primary is unhealthy and promote a replica, leading to data inconsistency and potential corruption.
:::

The shutdown procedure is composed of two steps:

1. The instance manager first issues a `CHECKPOINT`, then initiates a **smart**
shut down, disallowing any new connection to PostgreSQL. This step will last
for up to `.spec.smartShutdownTimeout` seconds.

2. If PostgreSQL is still up, the instance manager requests a **fast**
shut down, terminating any existing connection and exiting promptly.
If the instance is archiving and/or streaming WAL files, the process
will wait for up to the remaining time set in `.spec.stopDelay` to complete the
operation and then forcibly shut down. Such a timeout needs to be at least 15
seconds.

:::info[Important]
    In order to avoid any data loss in the Postgres cluster, which impacts
    the database [RPO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology), don't delete the Pod where
    the primary instance is running. In this case, perform a switchover to
    another instance first.
:::

### Shutdown of the primary during a switchover

During a switchover, the shutdown procedure slightly differs from the general
case. The instance manager of the former primary first issues a `CHECKPOINT`,
then initiates a **fast** shutdown of PostgreSQL before the designated new
primary is promoted, ensuring that all data are safely available on the new
primary.

For this reason, the `.spec.switchoverDelay`, expressed in seconds, controls
the  time given to the former primary to shut down gracefully and archive all
the WAL files. By default it is set to `3600` (1 hour).

:::warning
    The `.spec.switchoverDelay` option affects the [RPO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology)
    and [RTO](before_you_start.md#postgresql-terminology) of your PostgreSQL database. Setting it to
    a low value, might favor RTO over RPO but lead to data loss at cluster level
    and/or backup level. On the contrary, setting it to a high value, might remove
    the risk of data loss while leaving the cluster without an active primary for a
    longer time during the switchover.
:::

## Failover

In case of primary pod failure, the cluster will go into failover mode.
Please refer to the ["Failover" section](failover.md) for details.

## Disk Full Failure

Storage exhaustion is a well known issue for PostgreSQL clusters.
The [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/diskusage.html#DISK-FULL)
highlights the possible failure scenarios and the importance of monitoring disk
usage to prevent it from becoming full.

The same applies to CloudNativePG and Kubernetes as well: the
["Monitoring" section](monitoring.md#predefined-set-of-metrics)
provides details on checking the disk space used by WAL segments and standard
metrics on disk usage exported to Prometheus.

:::info[Important]
    In a production system, it is critical to monitor the database
    continuously. Exhausted disk storage can lead to a database server shutdown.
:::

:::note
    The detection of exhausted storage relies on a storage class that
    accurately reports disk size and usage. This may not be the case in simulated
    Kubernetes environments like Kind or with test storage class implementations
    such as `csi-driver-host-path`.
:::

If the disk containing the WALs becomes full and no more WAL segments can be
stored, PostgreSQL will stop working. CloudNativePG correctly detects this issue
by verifying that there is enough space to store the next WAL segment,
and avoids triggering a failover, which could complicate recovery.

That allows a human administrator to address the root cause.

In such a case, if supported by the storage class, the quickest course of action
is currently to:

1. Expand the storage size of the full PVC
2. Increase the size in the `Cluster` resource to the same value

Once the issue is resolved and there is sufficient free space for WAL segments,
the Pod will restart and the cluster will become healthy.

See also the ["Volume expansion" section](storage.md#volume-expansion) of the
documentation.
