docs/src/operator_conf.md, before:

---
id: operator_conf
sidebar_position: 260
title: Operator configuration
---

# Operator configuration
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

The operator for CloudNativePG is installed from a standard
deployment manifest and follows the convention over configuration paradigm.
While this is fine in most cases, there are some scenarios where you want
to change the default behavior, such as:

- defining annotations and labels to be inherited by all resources created
  by the operator and that are set in the cluster resource
- defining a different default image for PostgreSQL or an additional pull secret

By default, the operator is installed in the `cnpg-system`
namespace as a Kubernetes `Deployment` called `cnpg-controller-manager`.

:::note
    In the examples below we assume the default name and namespace for the operator deployment.
:::

The behavior of the operator can be customized through a `ConfigMap`/`Secret` that
is located in the same namespace of the operator deployment and with
`cnpg-controller-manager-config` as the name.

:::info[Important]
    Any change to the config's `ConfigMap`/`Secret` will not be automatically
    detected by the operator, - and as such, it needs to be reloaded (see below).
    Moreover, changes only apply to the resources created after the configuration
    is reloaded.
:::

:::info[Important]
    The operator first processes the ConfigMap values and then the Secret’s, in this order.
    As a result, if a parameter is defined in both places, the one in the Secret will be used.
:::

## Available options

The operator looks for the following environment variables to be defined in the `ConfigMap`/`Secret`:

Name | Description
---- | -----------
`CERTIFICATE_DURATION` | Determines the lifetime of the generated certificates in days. Default is 90.
`CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY` | The duration (in seconds) to wait between the roll-outs of different clusters during an operator upgrade. This setting controls the timing of upgrades across clusters, spreading them out to reduce system impact. The default value is `0` which means no delay between PostgreSQL cluster upgrades.
`CREATE_ANY_SERVICE` | When set to `true`, will create `-any` service for the cluster. Default is `false`
`DRAIN_TAINTS` | Specifies the taint keys that should be interpreted as indicators of node drain. By default, it includes the taints commonly applied by [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/), [Cluster Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler), and [Karpenter](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws): `node.kubernetes.io/unschedulable`, `ToBeDeletedByClusterAutoscaler`, `karpenter.sh/disrupted`, `karpenter.sh/disruption`.
`ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES` | When set to `true`, enables in-place updates of the instance manager after an update of the operator, avoiding rolling updates of the cluster (default `false`)
`EXPIRING_CHECK_THRESHOLD` | Determines the threshold, in days, for identifying a certificate as expiring. Default is 7.
`INCLUDE_PLUGINS` | A comma-separated list of plugins to be always included in the Cluster's reconciliation.
`INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS` | List of annotation names that, when defined in a `Cluster` metadata, will be inherited by all the generated resources, including pods
`INHERITED_LABELS` | List of label names that, when defined in a `Cluster` metadata, will be inherited by all the generated resources, including pods
`INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY` | The duration (in seconds) to wait between roll-outs of individual PostgreSQL instances within the same cluster during an operator upgrade. The default value is `0`, meaning no delay between upgrades of instances in the same PostgreSQL cluster.
`KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_DOMAIN` | Defines the domain suffix for service FQDNs within the Kubernetes cluster. If left unset, it defaults to "cluster.local".
`METRICS_CERT_DIR` | The directory where TLS certificates for the operator metrics server are stored. When set, enables TLS for the metrics endpoint on port 8080. The directory must contain `tls.crt` and `tls.key` files following standard Kubernetes TLS secret conventions. If not set, the metrics server operates without TLS (default behavior).
`MONITORING_QUERIES_CONFIGMAP` | The name of a ConfigMap in the operator's namespace with a set of default queries (to be specified under the key `queries`) to be applied to all created Clusters
`MONITORING_QUERIES_SECRET` | The name of a Secret in the operator's namespace with a set of default queries (to be specified under the key `queries`) to be applied to all created Clusters
`NAMESPACED` | When set to `true`, the operator will only access and listen to resources within its own namespace. Default is `false`. See [Namespaced Deployment](#namespaced-deployment) for details.
`OPERATOR_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the operator image used to bootstrap Pods. Defaults to the image specified during installation.
`PGBOUNCER_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the PgBouncer image used by default for new poolers. Defaults to the version specified in the operator.
`POSTGRES_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the PostgreSQL image used by default for new clusters. Defaults to the version specified in the operator.
`PULL_SECRET_NAME` | Name of an additional pull secret to be defined in the operator's namespace and to be used to download images
`STANDBY_TCP_USER_TIMEOUT` | Defines the [`TCP_USER_TIMEOUT` socket option](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-connection.html#GUC-TCP-USER-TIMEOUT) in milliseconds for replication connections from standby instances to the primary. Default is 5000 (5 seconds). Set to `0` to use the system's default.
`WATCH_NAMESPACE` | Specifies the namespace(s) where the operator should watch for resources. Multiple namespaces can be specified separated by commas. If not set, the operator watches all namespaces (cluster-wide mode).

Values in `INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS` and `INHERITED_LABELS` support path-like wildcards. For example, the value `example.com/*` will match
both the value `example.com/one` and `example.com/two`.

When you specify an additional pull secret name using the `PULL_SECRET_NAME` parameter,
the operator will use that secret to create a pull secret for every created PostgreSQL
cluster. That secret will be named `<cluster-name>-pull`.

The namespace where the operator looks for the `PULL_SECRET_NAME` secret is where
you installed the operator. If the operator is not able to find that secret, it
will ignore the configuration parameter.

## Defining an operator config map

The example below customizes the behavior of the operator, by defining
the label/annotation names to be inherited by the resources created by
any `Cluster` object that is deployed at a later time, by enabling
[in-place updates for the instance
manager](installation_upgrade.md#in-place-updates-of-the-instance-manager),
and by spreading upgrades.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cnpg-controller-manager-config
  namespace: cnpg-system
data:
  CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '60'
  ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES: 'true'
  INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS: categories
  INHERITED_LABELS: environment, workload, app
  INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '10'
```

## Defining an operator secret

The example below customizes the behavior of the operator, by defining
the label/annotation names to be inherited by the resources created by
any `Cluster` object that is deployed at a later time, and by enabling
[in-place updates for the instance
manager](installation_upgrade.md#in-place-updates-of-the-instance-manager),
and by spreading upgrades.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: cnpg-controller-manager-config
  namespace: cnpg-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '60'
  ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES: 'true'
  INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS: categories
  INHERITED_LABELS: environment, workload, app
  INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '10'
```

## Restarting the operator to reload configs

For the change to be effective, you need to recreate the operator pods to
reload the config map. If you have installed the operator on Kubernetes
using the manifest you can do that by issuing:

```shell
kubectl rollout restart deployment \
    -n cnpg-system \
    cnpg-controller-manager
```

In general, given a specific namespace, you can delete the operator pods with
the following command:

```shell
kubectl delete pods -n [NAMESPACE_NAME_HERE] \
  -l app.kubernetes.io/name=cloudnative-pg
```

:::warning
    Customizations will be applied only to `Cluster` resources created
    after the reload of the operator deployment.
:::

Following the above example, if the `Cluster` definition contains a `categories`
annotation and any of the `environment`, `workload`, or `app` labels, these will
be inherited by all the resources generated by the deployment.

## Profiling tools

The operator can expose a pprof HTTP server on `localhost:6060`.
To enable it, edit the operator deployment and add the flag
`--pprof-server=true` to the container args:

```shell
kubectl edit deployment -n cnpg-system cnpg-controller-manager
```

Add `--pprof-server=true` to the args list, for example:

```yaml
      containers:
      - args:
        - controller
        - --enable-leader-election
        - --config-map-name=cnpg-controller-manager-config
        - --secret-name=cnpg-controller-manager-config
        - --log-level=info
        - --pprof-server=true # relevant line
        command:
        - /manager
```

After saving, the deployment will roll out and the new pod will
have the pprof server enabled.

:::info[Important]
    The pprof server only serves plain HTTP on port `6060`.
:::

To access the pprof endpoints from your local machine, use
port-forwarding:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n cnpg-system deploy/cnpg-controller-manager 6060
curl -sS http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/
go tool pprof http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/profile?seconds=30
```

You can also access pprof using the browser at [http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/](http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/).

:::warning
    The example above uses `kubectl port-forward` for local testing only.
    This is **not** the intended way to expose the feature in production.
    Treat pprof as a sensitive debugging interface and never expose it publicly.
    If you must access it remotely, secure it with proper network policies and access controls.
:::

## Namespaced Deployment

By default, CloudNativePG operates in cluster-wide mode, watching and managing PostgreSQL clusters across all namespaces. However, you can configure the operator to run in namespaced mode, where it only manages resources within a specific namespace.

### Enabling Namespaced Mode

To enable namespaced deployment, both `OPERATOR_NAMESPACE` and `WATCH_NAMESPACE` must be set to the same namespace. Only when these parameters match can `NAMESPACED` mode be enabled:

```yaml
env:
- name: OPERATOR_NAMESPACE
  valueFrom:
    fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.namespace
- name: WATCH_NAMESPACE
  valueFrom:
    fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.namespace
- name: NAMESPACED
  value: "true"
```

### RBAC Considerations

When deploying in namespaced mode, the operator's default RBAC permissions can be restricted to not access `Nodes` and `ClusterImageCatalog`.
In namespaced mode, the operator will not have permissions to access cluster-scoped resources or resources in other namespaces. Ensure that:

### Known Limitations with PodDisruptionBudget

!!! Warning
    When running in namespaced mode with PodDisruptionBudget (PDB) enabled, node drain operations may fail.

CloudNativePG creates PodDisruptionBudgets to protect PostgreSQL instances during voluntary disruptions. However, in namespaced mode, a critical limitation exists:

- The Kubernetes node drain process requires cluster-level permissions to evict pods protected by PDBs
- In namespaced mode, the operator lacks the necessary cluster-wide permissions to properly coordinate with the node drain controller
- This can result in node drain operations timing out or failing when attempting to evict PostgreSQL pods

**Workarounds:**

1. **Disable PDB**: Set `enablePDB: false` in your `Cluster` specification when running in namespaced mode
2. **Manual intervention**: Manually delete or scale down PostgreSQL pods before draining nodes
3. **Use cluster-wide mode**: If node drain automation is critical, consider deploying the operator in cluster-wide mode

Example of disabling PDB:

```yaml
apiVersion: postgresql.cnpg.io/v1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: cluster-example
spec:
  instances: 3
  enablePDB: false  # Disable PDB in namespaced mode
  storage:
    size: 1Gi
```

Commit message:

feat: code review fixes
This commit contains code review corrections. Moving the namespaced
logic from utils to configuration package.
Added a validation function for the configuration. This validation
function can be extended to validate that the configuration provided via
env vars, secrets and configmaps are compatible with each other.

Signed-off-by: Max Lengdell <max.a.lengdell@ericsson.com>
Signed-off-by: Armando Ruocco <armando.ruocco@enterprisedb.com>

docs/src/operator_conf.md, after:

---
id: operator_conf
sidebar_position: 260
title: Operator configuration
---

# Operator configuration
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

The operator for CloudNativePG is installed from a standard
deployment manifest and follows the convention over configuration paradigm.
While this is fine in most cases, there are some scenarios where you want
to change the default behavior, such as:

- defining annotations and labels to be inherited by all resources created
  by the operator and that are set in the cluster resource
- defining a different default image for PostgreSQL or an additional pull secret

By default, the operator is installed in the `cnpg-system`
namespace as a Kubernetes `Deployment` called `cnpg-controller-manager`.

:::note
    In the examples below we assume the default name and namespace for the operator deployment.
:::

The behavior of the operator can be customized through a `ConfigMap`/`Secret` that
is located in the same namespace of the operator deployment and with
`cnpg-controller-manager-config` as the name.

:::info[Important]
    Any change to the config's `ConfigMap`/`Secret` will not be automatically
    detected by the operator, - and as such, it needs to be reloaded (see below).
    Moreover, changes only apply to the resources created after the configuration
    is reloaded.
:::

:::info[Important]
    The operator first processes the ConfigMap values and then the Secret’s, in this order.
    As a result, if a parameter is defined in both places, the one in the Secret will be used.
:::

## Available options

The operator looks for the following environment variables to be defined in the `ConfigMap`/`Secret`:

Name | Description
---- | -----------
`CERTIFICATE_DURATION` | Determines the lifetime of the generated certificates in days. Default is 90.
`CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY` | The duration (in seconds) to wait between the roll-outs of different clusters during an operator upgrade. This setting controls the timing of upgrades across clusters, spreading them out to reduce system impact. The default value is `0` which means no delay between PostgreSQL cluster upgrades.
`CREATE_ANY_SERVICE` | When set to `true`, will create `-any` service for the cluster. Default is `false`
`DRAIN_TAINTS` | Specifies the taint keys that should be interpreted as indicators of node drain. By default, it includes the taints commonly applied by [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/), [Cluster Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler), and [Karpenter](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws): `node.kubernetes.io/unschedulable`, `ToBeDeletedByClusterAutoscaler`, `karpenter.sh/disrupted`, `karpenter.sh/disruption`.
`ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES` | When set to `true`, enables in-place updates of the instance manager after an update of the operator, avoiding rolling updates of the cluster (default `false`)
`EXPIRING_CHECK_THRESHOLD` | Determines the threshold, in days, for identifying a certificate as expiring. Default is 7.
`INCLUDE_PLUGINS` | A comma-separated list of plugins to be always included in the Cluster's reconciliation.
`INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS` | List of annotation names that, when defined in a `Cluster` metadata, will be inherited by all the generated resources, including pods
`INHERITED_LABELS` | List of label names that, when defined in a `Cluster` metadata, will be inherited by all the generated resources, including pods
`INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY` | The duration (in seconds) to wait between roll-outs of individual PostgreSQL instances within the same cluster during an operator upgrade. The default value is `0`, meaning no delay between upgrades of instances in the same PostgreSQL cluster.
`KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_DOMAIN` | Defines the domain suffix for service FQDNs within the Kubernetes cluster. If left unset, it defaults to "cluster.local".
`METRICS_CERT_DIR` | The directory where TLS certificates for the operator metrics server are stored. When set, enables TLS for the metrics endpoint on port 8080. The directory must contain `tls.crt` and `tls.key` files following standard Kubernetes TLS secret conventions. If not set, the metrics server operates without TLS (default behavior).
`MONITORING_QUERIES_CONFIGMAP` | The name of a ConfigMap in the operator's namespace with a set of default queries (to be specified under the key `queries`) to be applied to all created Clusters
`MONITORING_QUERIES_SECRET` | The name of a Secret in the operator's namespace with a set of default queries (to be specified under the key `queries`) to be applied to all created Clusters
`NAMESPACED` | When set to `true`, the operator will only access and listen to resources within its own namespace. Default is `false`. See [Namespaced Deployment](#namespaced-deployment) for details.
`OPERATOR_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the operator image used to bootstrap Pods. Defaults to the image specified during installation.
`PGBOUNCER_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the PgBouncer image used by default for new poolers. Defaults to the version specified in the operator.
`POSTGRES_IMAGE_NAME` | The name of the PostgreSQL image used by default for new clusters. Defaults to the version specified in the operator.
`PULL_SECRET_NAME` | Name of an additional pull secret to be defined in the operator's namespace and to be used to download images
`STANDBY_TCP_USER_TIMEOUT` | Defines the [`TCP_USER_TIMEOUT` socket option](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-connection.html#GUC-TCP-USER-TIMEOUT) in milliseconds for replication connections from standby instances to the primary. Default is 5000 (5 seconds). Set to `0` to use the system's default.
`WATCH_NAMESPACE` | Specifies the namespace(s) where the operator should watch for resources. Multiple namespaces can be specified separated by commas. If not set, the operator watches all namespaces (cluster-wide mode).

Values in `INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS` and `INHERITED_LABELS` support path-like wildcards. For example, the value `example.com/*` will match
both the value `example.com/one` and `example.com/two`.

When you specify an additional pull secret name using the `PULL_SECRET_NAME` parameter,
the operator will use that secret to create a pull secret for every created PostgreSQL
cluster. That secret will be named `<cluster-name>-pull`.

The namespace where the operator looks for the `PULL_SECRET_NAME` secret is where
you installed the operator. If the operator is not able to find that secret, it
will ignore the configuration parameter.

## Defining an operator config map

The example below customizes the behavior of the operator, by defining
the label/annotation names to be inherited by the resources created by
any `Cluster` object that is deployed at a later time, by enabling
[in-place updates for the instance
manager](installation_upgrade.md#in-place-updates-of-the-instance-manager),
and by spreading upgrades.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cnpg-controller-manager-config
  namespace: cnpg-system
data:
  CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '60'
  ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES: 'true'
  INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS: categories
  INHERITED_LABELS: environment, workload, app
  INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '10'
```

## Defining an operator secret

The example below customizes the behavior of the operator, by defining
the label/annotation names to be inherited by the resources created by
any `Cluster` object that is deployed at a later time, and by enabling
[in-place updates for the instance
manager](installation_upgrade.md#in-place-updates-of-the-instance-manager),
and by spreading upgrades.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: cnpg-controller-manager-config
  namespace: cnpg-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  CLUSTERS_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '60'
  ENABLE_INSTANCE_MANAGER_INPLACE_UPDATES: 'true'
  INHERITED_ANNOTATIONS: categories
  INHERITED_LABELS: environment, workload, app
  INSTANCES_ROLLOUT_DELAY: '10'
```

## Restarting the operator to reload configs

For the change to be effective, you need to recreate the operator pods to
reload the config map. If you have installed the operator on Kubernetes
using the manifest you can do that by issuing:

```shell
kubectl rollout restart deployment \
    -n cnpg-system \
    cnpg-controller-manager
```

In general, given a specific namespace, you can delete the operator pods with
the following command:

```shell
kubectl delete pods -n [NAMESPACE_NAME_HERE] \
  -l app.kubernetes.io/name=cloudnative-pg
```

:::warning
    Customizations will be applied only to `Cluster` resources created
    after the reload of the operator deployment.
:::

Following the above example, if the `Cluster` definition contains a `categories`
annotation and any of the `environment`, `workload`, or `app` labels, these will
be inherited by all the resources generated by the deployment.

## Profiling tools

The operator can expose a pprof HTTP server on `localhost:6060`.
To enable it, edit the operator deployment and add the flag
`--pprof-server=true` to the container args:

```shell
kubectl edit deployment -n cnpg-system cnpg-controller-manager
```

Add `--pprof-server=true` to the args list, for example:

```yaml
      containers:
      - args:
        - controller
        - --enable-leader-election
        - --config-map-name=cnpg-controller-manager-config
        - --secret-name=cnpg-controller-manager-config
        - --log-level=info
        - --pprof-server=true # relevant line
        command:
        - /manager
```

After saving, the deployment will roll out and the new pod will
have the pprof server enabled.

:::info[Important]
    The pprof server only serves plain HTTP on port `6060`.
:::

To access the pprof endpoints from your local machine, use
port-forwarding:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n cnpg-system deploy/cnpg-controller-manager 6060
curl -sS http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/
go tool pprof http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/profile?seconds=30
```

You can also access pprof using the browser at [http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/](http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/).

:::warning
    The example above uses `kubectl port-forward` for local testing only.
    This is **not** the intended way to expose the feature in production.
    Treat pprof as a sensitive debugging interface and never expose it publicly.
    If you must access it remotely, secure it with proper network policies and access controls.
:::

## Namespaced Deployment

By default, CloudNativePG operates in cluster-wide mode, watching and managing PostgreSQL clusters across all namespaces. However, you can configure the operator to run in namespaced mode, where it only manages resources within a specific namespace.

### Enabling Namespaced Mode

To enable namespaced deployment, both `OPERATOR_NAMESPACE` and `WATCH_NAMESPACE` must be set to the same namespace. Only when these parameters match can `NAMESPACED` mode be enabled:

```yaml
env:
- name: OPERATOR_NAMESPACE
  valueFrom:
    fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.namespace
- name: WATCH_NAMESPACE
  valueFrom:
    fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.namespace
- name: NAMESPACED
  value: "true"
```

### RBAC Considerations

When deploying in namespaced mode, the operator's default RBAC permissions can be restricted to not access `Nodes` and `ClusterImageCatalog`.
In namespaced mode, the operator will not have permissions to access cluster-scoped resources or resources in other namespaces.

### Known Limitations with SyncReplicaElectionConstraint

`cluster.Spec.PostgresConfiguration.SyncReplicaElectionConstraint` is used to enforce deployment constraints for synchronous replicas during election. This feature will not work due to restricted rbac of the operator in namespaced mode.

### Known Limitations with PodDisruptionBudget

!!! Warning
    When running in namespaced mode with PodDisruptionBudget (PDB) enabled, node drain operations may fail.

CloudNativePG creates PodDisruptionBudgets to protect PostgreSQL instances during voluntary disruptions. However, in namespaced mode, a critical limitation exists:

- The Kubernetes node drain process requires cluster-level permissions to evict pods protected by PDBs
- In namespaced mode, the operator lacks the necessary cluster-wide permissions to properly coordinate with the node drain controller
- This can result in node drain operations timing out or failing when attempting to evict PostgreSQL pods

**Workarounds:**

1. **Disable PDB**: Set `enablePDB: false` in your `Cluster` specification when running in namespaced mode
2. **Manual intervention**: Manually delete or scale down PostgreSQL pods before draining nodes
3. **Use cluster-wide mode**: If node drain automation is critical, consider deploying the operator in cluster-wide mode

Example of disabling PDB:

```yaml
apiVersion: postgresql.cnpg.io/v1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: cluster-example
spec:
  instances: 3
  enablePDB: false  # Disable PDB in namespaced mode
  storage:
    size: 1Gi
```
