---
id: scheduling
sidebar_position: 120
title: Scheduling
---

# Scheduling
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0 -->

Scheduling, in Kubernetes, is the process responsible for placing a new pod on
the best node possible, based on several criteria.

:::note[Kubernetes documentation]
    Please refer to the
    [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/)
    for more information on scheduling, including all the available policies. On
    this page we assume you are familiar with concepts like affinity,
    anti-affinity, node selectors, and so on.
:::

You can control how the CloudNativePG cluster's instances should be
scheduled through the [`affinity`](cloudnative-pg.v1.md#affinityconfiguration)
section in the definition of the cluster, which supports:

- pod affinity/anti-affinity
- node selectors
- tolerations

## Pod Affinity and Anti-Affinity

Kubernetes provides mechanisms to control where pods are scheduled using
*affinity* and *anti-affinity* rules. These rules allow you to specify whether
a pod should be scheduled on particular nodes (*affinity*) or avoided on
specific nodes (*anti-affinity*) based on the workloads already running there.
This capability is technically referred to as **inter-pod
affinity/anti-affinity**.

By default, CloudNativePG configures cluster instances to preferably be
scheduled on different nodes, while `pgBouncer` instances might still run on
the same nodes.

For example, given the following `Cluster` specification:

```yaml
apiVersion: postgresql.cnpg.io/v1
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  name: cluster-example
spec:
  instances: 3
  imageName: ghcr.io/cloudnative-pg/postgresql:18.2-system-trixie

  affinity:
    enablePodAntiAffinity: true # Default value
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname # Default value
    podAntiAffinityType: preferred # Default value

  storage:
    size: 1Gi
```

The `affinity` configuration applied in the instance pods will be:

```yaml
affinity:
  podAntiAffinity:
    preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - podAffinityTerm:
          labelSelector:
            matchExpressions:
              - key: cnpg.io/cluster
                operator: In
                values:
                  - cluster-example
              - key: cnpg.io/podRole
                operator: In
                values:
                  - instance
          topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
        weight: 100
```

With this setup, Kubernetes will *prefer* to schedule a 3-node PostgreSQL
cluster across three different nodes, assuming sufficient resources are
available.

### Requiring Pod Anti-Affinity

You can modify the default behavior by adjusting the settings mentioned above.

For example, setting `podAntiAffinityType` to `required` will enforce
`requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` instead of
`preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`.

However, be aware that this strict requirement may cause pods to remain pending
if resources are insufficient—this is particularly relevant when using [Cluster Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) <!-- wokeignore:rule=master -->
for automated horizontal scaling in a Kubernetes cluster.

:::note[Inter-pod Affinity and Anti-Affinity]
    For more details, refer to the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity).
:::

### Topology Considerations

In cloud environments, you might consider using `topology.kubernetes.io/zone`
as the `topologyKey` to ensure pods are distributed across different
availability zones rather than just nodes. For more options, see
[Well-Known Labels, Annotations, and Taints](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/).

### Disabling Anti-Affinity Policies

If needed, you can disable the operator-generated anti-affinity policies by
setting `enablePodAntiAffinity` to `false`.

### Fine-Grained Control with Custom Rules

For scenarios requiring more precise control, you can specify custom pod
affinity or anti-affinity rules using the `additionalPodAffinity` and
`additionalPodAntiAffinity` configuration attributes. These custom rules will
be added to those generated by the operator, if enabled, or used directly if
the operator-generated rules are disabled.

:::note
    When using `additionalPodAntiAffinity` or `additionalPodAffinity`, you must
    provide the full `podAntiAffinity` or `podAffinity` structure expected by the
    Pod specification. The following YAML example demonstrates how to configure
    only one instance of PostgreSQL per worker node, regardless of which PostgreSQL
    cluster it belongs to:
:::

```yaml
    additionalPodAntiAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - labelSelector:
          matchExpressions:
          - key: postgresql
            operator: Exists
            values: []
        topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
```

## Node selection through `nodeSelector`

Kubernetes allows `nodeSelector` to provide a list of labels (defined as
key-value pairs) to select the nodes on which a pod can run. Specifically,
the node must have each indicated key-value pair as labels for the
pod to be scheduled and run.

Similarly, CloudNativePG consents you to define a `nodeSelector` in the
`affinity` section, so that you can request a PostgreSQL cluster to run only
on nodes that have those labels.

## Tolerations

Kubernetes allows you to specify (through `taints`) whether a node should repel
all pods not explicitly tolerating (through `tolerations`) their `taints`.

So, by setting a proper set of `tolerations` for a workload matching a specific
node's `taints`, Kubernetes scheduler will now take into consideration the
tainted node, while deciding on which node to schedule the workload.
Tolerations can be configured for all the pods of a Cluster through the
`.spec.affinity.tolerations` section, which accepts the usual Kubernetes syntax
for tolerations.

:::note[Taints and Tolerations]
    More information on taints and tolerations can be found in the
    [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/).
:::

## Isolating PostgreSQL workloads

:::info[Important]
    Before proceeding, please ensure you have read the
    ["Architecture"](architecture.md) section of the documentation.
:::

While you can deploy PostgreSQL on Kubernetes in various ways, we recommend
following these essential principles for production environments:

- **Exploit Availability Zones:** If possible, take advantage of availability
  zones (AZs) within the same Kubernetes cluster by distributing PostgreSQL
  instances across different AZs.
- **Dedicate Worker Nodes:** Allocate specific worker nodes for PostgreSQL
  workloads through the `node-role.kubernetes.io/postgres` label and taint,
  as detailed in the [Reserving Nodes for PostgreSQL Workloads](architecture.md#reserving-nodes-for-postgresql-workloads)
  section.
- **Avoid Node Overlap:** Ensure that no instances from the same PostgreSQL
  cluster are running on the same node.

As explained in greater detail in the previous sections, CloudNativePG
provides the flexibility to configure pod anti-affinity, node selectors, and
tolerations.

Below is a sample configuration to ensure that a PostgreSQL `Cluster` is
deployed on `postgres` nodes, with its instances distributed across different
nodes:

```yaml
  # <snip>
  affinity:
    enablePodAntiAffinity: true
    topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
    podAntiAffinityType: required
    nodeSelector:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/postgres: ""
    tolerations:
    - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/postgres
      operator: Exists
      effect: NoSchedule
  # <snip>
```

Despite its simplicity, this setup ensures optimal distribution and isolation
of PostgreSQL workloads, leading to enhanced performance and reliability in
your production environment.

