---
id: v1.22
title: Release notes for CloudNativePG 1.22
---

# Release notes for CloudNativePG 1.22

History of user-visible changes in the 1.22 minor release of CloudNativePG.

For a complete list of changes, please refer to the
[commits](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/commits/release-1.22)
on the release branch in GitHub.

## Version 1.22.5

**Release date:** Jul 29, 2024

:::warning
    This is expected to be the last release in the 1.22.X series.
    Users are encouraged to update to a newer minor version soon.
:::

### Enhancements:

- Add transparent support for PostgreSQL 17's `allow_alter_system` parameter,
  enabling or disabling the `ALTER SYSTEM` command through the
  `.spec.postgresql.enableAlterSystem` option (#4921).
- Introduce the `reconcilePodSpec` annotation on the `Cluster` and `Pooler`
  resources to control the restart of pods following a change in the Pod
  specification (#5069).
- Support the new metrics introduced in PgBouncer 1.23 in the `Pooler` metrics
  collector (#5044).

### Fixes:

- Enhance the mechanism for detecting Pods that have been terminated but not
  deleted during an eviction process, and extend the cleanup process during
  maintenance windows to include unschedulable Pods when the `reusePVC` flag is
  set to false (#2056).
- Disable `pg_rewind` execution for newly created replicas that employ
  VolumeSnapshot during bootstrapping to avoid introducing a new shutdown
  checkpoint entry in the WAL files. This ensures that replicas can reconnect to
  the primary without issues, which would otherwise be hindered by the additional
  checkpoint entry (#5081).
- Gracefully handle failures during the initialization of a new instance.
  Any remaining data from the failed initialization is now either removed or,
  if it's a valid PostgreSQL data directory, moved to a backup location to avoid
  possible data loss (#5112).
- Enhance the robustness of the immediate backups reconciler by implementing
  retry logic upon initial backup failure (#4982).
- Wait for the `postmaster` to shut down before starting it again (#4938).
- Exclude immutable databases from `pg_database` metric monitoring and alerting
  processes (#4980).
- Removed unnecessary permissions from the operator service account (#4911).
- Ensure the operator initiates a rollout of the `Pooler` instance when
  the operator image is upgraded (#5006)
- Address race condition causing the readiness probe to incorrectly
  show "not ready" after a PostgreSQL restart, even when the
  `postmaster` was accessible (#4920).
- Prevent reconciliation of resources that aren't owned by a `Pooler` (#4967).
- Renew the certificates managed by the operator when the DNS Subject
  Alternative Names (SANs) are updated (#3269, #3319).
- Set PVC default `AccessModes` in the template only when unspecified (#4845).
- Gracefully handle unsatisfiable backup schedule (#5109).
- `cnpg` plugin:
  - Properly handle errors during the `status` command execution.
  - Support TLS in the `status` command (#4915).

## Version 1.22.4

**Release date:** Jun 12, 2024

:::warning
    Version 1.22 is approaching its End-of-Life (EOL) on Jul 24, 2024.
    If you haven't already, please begin planning for an upgrade promptly to
    ensure continued support and security.
:::

### Enhancements:

- Enabled configuration of standby-sensitive parameters during recovery using a
  physical backup (#4564)

- Enabled the configuration of the liveness probe timeout via the
  `.spec.livenessProbeTimeout` option (#4719)

- `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`:

    - Enhanced support for ANSI colors in the plugin by adding the `--color`
      option, which accepts `always`, `never`, and `auto` (default) as values
      (#4775)
    - The plugin is now available on Homebrew for macOS users (#4602)

### Fixes:

- Prevented fenced instances from entering an unnecessary loop and consuming
  all available CPU (#4625)

- Resolved an issue where the instance manager on the primary would
  indefinitely wait for the instance to start after encountering a failure
  following a stop operation (#4434)

- Fixed an issue where the interaction between `hot_standby_feedback` and
  managed cluster-level replication slots was preventing the autovacuum from
  operating correctly; this issue was causing disk space to remain occupied by
  dead tuples (#4811)

- Fixed a panic in the backup controller that occurred when pod container
  statuses were missing (#4765)

- Prevented unnecessary shutdown of the instance manager (#4670)

- Prevented unnecessary reloads of PostgreSQL configuration when unchanged (#4531)

- Prevented unnecessary reloads of the ident map by ensuring a consistent and
  unique method of writing its content (#4648)

- Avoided conflicts during phase registration by patching the status of the
  resource instead of updating it (#4637)

- Implemented a timeout when restarting PostgreSQL and lifting fencing (#4504)

- Ensured that a replica cluster is restarted after promotion to properly set
  the archive mode (#4399)

- Removed an unneeded concurrent keep-alive routine that was causing random
  failures in volume snapshot backups (#4768)

- Ensured correct parsing of the additional rows field returned when the
  `pgaudit.log_rows` option was enabled, preventing audit logs from being
  incorrectly routed to the normal log stream (#4394)

- `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`:

    - Resolved an issue with listing PDBs using the `cnpg status` command (#4530)

### Changes

- Default operand image set to PostgreSQL 16.3 (#4584)
- Removed all RBAC requirements on namespace objects (#4753)

## Version 1.22.3

**Release date:** Apr 24, 2024

### Enhancements:

- Users can now configure the `wal_log_hints` PostgreSQL parameter (#4218)
  (#4218)
- Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDN) in URIs for automatically generated
  secrets (#4095)
- Cleanup of instance Pods not owned by the Cluster during Cluster restore
  (#4141)
- Error detection when invoking `barman-cloud-wal-restore` in `recovery`
  bootstrap (#4101)

### Fixes:

- Ensured that before a switchover, the elected replica is in streaming
  replication (#4288)
- Correctly handle parsing errors of instances' LSN when sorting them (#4283)
- Recreate the primary Pod if there are no healthy standbys available to
  promote (#4132)
- Cleanup `PGDATA` in case of failure of the restore job (#4151)
- Reload certificates on configuration update (#3705)
- `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`:
    - Improve the arguments handling of `destroy`, `fencing`, and `promote`
      plugin commands (#4280)
    - Correctly handle the percentage of the backup progress in `cnpg status`
      (#4131)
    - Gracefully handle databases with no sequences in `sync-sequences` command
      (#4346)

### Changes:

- The Grafana dashboard now resides at
  https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/grafana-dashboards (#4154)

## Version 1.22.2

**Release date:** Mar 14, 2024

### Enhancements

- Allow customization of the `wal_level` GUC in PostgreSQL (#4020)
- Add the `cnpg.io/skipWalArchiving` annotation to disable WAL archiving when
  set to `enabled` (#4055)
- Enrich the `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl` with the `publication` and
  `subscription` command groups to imperatively set up PostgreSQL native
  logical replication (#4052)
- Allow customization of `CERTIFICATE_DURATION` and `EXPIRING_CHECK_THRESHOLD`
  for automated management of TLS certificates handled by the operator (#3686)
- Retrieve the correct architecture's binary from the corresponding catalog in
  the running operator image during in-place updates, enabling the operator to
  inject the correct binary into any Pod with a supported architecture (#3840)
- Introduce initial support for tab-completion with the `cnpg` plugin for
  `kubectl` (#3875)


### Fixes

- Properly synchronize PVC group labels with those on the pods, a critical
  aspect when all pods are deleted and the operator needs to decide which Pod
  to recreate first (#3930)
- Disable `wal_sender_timeout` when cloning a replica to prevent timeout errors
  due to slow connections (#4080)
- Ensure that volume snapshots are ready before initiating recovery bootstrap
  procedures, preventing an error condition where recovery with incomplete
  backups could enter an error loop (#3663)
- Prevent an error loop when unsetting connection limits in managed roles (#3832)
- Resolve a corner case in hibernation where the instance pod has been deleted,
  but the cluster status still has the hibernation condition set to false (#3970)
- Correctly detect Google Cloud capabilities for Barman Cloud (#3931)

### Security

- Use `Role` instead of `ClusterRole` for operator permissions in OLM,
  requiring fewer privileges when installed on a per-namespace basis (#3855,
  #3990)
- Enforce fully-qualified object names in SQL queries for the PgBouncer pooler
  (#4080)

### Changes

- Follow Kubernetes recommendations to switch from client-side to server-side
  application of manifests, requiring the `--server-side` option by default
  when installing the operator (#3729).
- Set the default operand image to PostgreSQL 16.2 (#3823).

## Version 1.22.1

**Release date:** Feb 2, 2024

Enhancements:

- Tailor ephemeral volume storage in a Postgres cluster using a claim template
  through the `ephemeralVolumeSource` option (#3678)
- Introduce the `pgadmin4` command in the `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`,
  providing a straightforward method to demonstrate connecting to a given
  database cluster and navigate its content in a local environment such as kind -
  for evaluation purposes only (#3701)
- Allow customization of PostgreSQL's ident map file via the
  `.spec.postgresql.pg_ident` stanza, through a list of user name maps (#3534)

Fixes:

- Prevent an unrecoverable issue with `pg_rewind` failing due to
  `postgresql.auto.conf` being read-only on clusters where the `ALTER SYSTEM`
  SQL command is disabled - the default (#3728)
- Proper recovery of tablespaces from volume snapshots (#3682)
- Reduce the risk of disk space shortage when using the import facility of the
  `initdb` bootstrap method, by disabling the durability settings in the PostgreSQL
  instance for the duration of the import process (#3743)
- Avoid pod restart due to erroneous resource quantity comparisons, e.g. "1 !=
  1000m"  (#3706)
- Properly escape reserved characters in `pgpass` connection fields (#3713)
- Prevent systematic rollout of pods due to considering zero and nil different
  values in `.spec.projectedVolumeTemplate.sources` (#3647)
- Ensure configuration coherence by pruning from `postgresql.auto.conf` any
  options now incorporated into `override.conf` (#3773)

## Version 1.22.0

**Release date:** Dec 21, 2023

:::info[Important changes from previous versions]
    This release introduces a significant change, disabling the default usage
    of the `ALTER SYSTEM` command in PostgreSQL. For users upgrading from a
    previous version who wish to retain the old behavior: please refer to the
    [upgrade documentation](../../installation_upgrade.md) for detailed instructions.
:::

### Features:

- **Declarative Tablespaces**: Introducing the `tablespaces` stanza in the
  `Cluster` spec, enabling comprehensive lifecycle management of PostgreSQL
  tablespaces for enhanced vertical scalability (#3410).

- **Temporary Tablespaces**: Adding the `.spec.tablespaces[*].temporary`
  option to facilitate the utilization of a tablespace for temporary database
  operations, by incorporating the name into the `temp_tablespaces` PostgreSQL
  parameter (#3464).

### Security:

- By default, TLSv1.3 is now enforced on all PostgreSQL 12 or higher
  installations. Additionally, users can configure the `ssl_ciphers`,
  `ssl_min_protocol_version`, and `ssl_max_protocol_version` GUCs (#3408).
- Integration of Docker image scanning with Dockle and Snyk to enhance security
  measures (#3300).

### Enhancements:

- Improved reconciliation of external clusters (#3533).
- Introduction of the ability to enable/disable the `ALTER SYSTEM` command (#3535).
- Support for Prometheus' dynamic relabeling through the
  `podMonitorMetricRelabelings` and `podMonitorRelabelings` options in the
  `.spec.monitoring` stanza of the `Cluster` and `Pooler` resources (#3075).
- Enhanced computation of the first recoverability point and last successful
  backup by considering volume snapshots alongside object-store backups (#2940). <!-- NO 1.20 -->
- Elimination of the use of the `PGPASSFILE` environment variable when
  establishing a network connection to PostgreSQL (#3522).
- Improved `cnpg report` plugin command by collecting a cluster's PVCs (#3357).
- Enhancement of the `cnpg status` plugin command, providing information about
  managed roles, including alerts (#3310).
- Introduction of Red Hat UBI 8 container images for the operator, suitable for
  OLM deployments. <!-- NO 1.20 -->
- Connection pooler:
    - Scaling down instances of a `Pooler` resource to 0 is now possible (#3517).
    - Addition of the `cnpg.io/podRole` label with a value of 'pooler' to every
      pooler deployment, differentiating them from instance pods (#3396).

Fixes:

- Reconciliation of metadata, annotations, and labels of `PodDisruptionBudget`
  resources (#3312 and #3434).
- Reconciliation of the metadata of the managed credential secrets (#3316).
- Resolution of a bug in the backup snapshot code where an error reading the
  body would be handled as an overall error, leaving the backup process
  indefinitely stuck (#3321).
- Implicit setting of online backup with the `cnpg backup` plugin command when
  either `immediate-checkpoint` or `wait-for-archive` options are requested (#3449).
- Disabling of wal_sender_timeout when joining through pg_basebackup (#3586)
- Reloading of secrets used by external clusters (#3565)
- Connection pooler:
    - Ensuring the controller watches all secrets owned by a `Pooler` resource (#3428).
    - Reconciliation of `RoleBinding` for `Pooler` resources (#3391).
    - Reconciliation of `imagePullSecret` for `Pooler` resources (#3389).
    - Reconciliation of the service of a `Pooler` and addition of the required labels (#3349).
    - Extension of `Pooler` labels to the deployment as well, not just the pods (#3350).

Changes:

- Default operand image set to PostgreSQL 16.1 (#3270).
- The `ALTER SYSTEM` command is now disabled by default (#3545). <!-- NO 1.21, 1.20 -->
