# Release notes for CloudNativePG 1.22

History of user-visible changes in the 1.22 minor release of CloudNativePG.

For a complete list of changes, please refer to the
[commits](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/commits/release-1.22)
on the release branch in GitHub.

## Version 1.22.3

**Release date:** Apr 24, 2024

Enhancements:

- Users can now configure the `wal_log_hints` PostgreSQL parameter (#4218)
  (#4218)
- Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDN) in URIs for automatically generated
  secrets (#4095)
- Cleanup of instance Pods not owned by the Cluster during Cluster restore
  (#4141)
- Error detection when invoking `barman-cloud-wal-restore` in `recovery`
  bootstrap (#4101)

Fixes:

- Ensured that before a switchover, the elected replica is in streaming
  replication (#4288)
- Correctly handle parsing errors of instances' LSN when sorting them (#4283)
- Recreate the primary Pod if there are no healthy standbys available to
  promote (#4132)
- Cleanup `PGDATA` in case of failure of the restore job (#4151)
- Reload certificates on configuration update (#3705)
- `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`:
    - Improve the arguments handling of `destroy`, `fencing`, and `promote`
      plugin commands (#4280)
    - Correctly handle the percentage of the backup progress in `cnpg status`
      (#4131)
    - Gracefully handle databases with no sequences in `sync-sequences` command
      (#4346)

Changes:

- The Grafana dashboard now resides at
  https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/grafana-dashboards (#4154)

## Version 1.22.2

**Release date:** Mar 14, 2024

### Enhancements

- Allow customization of the `wal_level` GUC in PostgreSQL (#4020)
- Add the `cnpg.io/skipWalArchiving` annotation to disable WAL archiving when
  set to `enabled` (#4055)
- Enrich the `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl` with the `publication` and
  `subscription` command groups to imperatively set up PostgreSQL native
  logical replication (#4052)
- Allow customization of `CERTIFICATE_DURATION` and `EXPIRING_CHECK_THRESHOLD`
  for automated management of TLS certificates handled by the operator (#3686)
- Retrieve the correct architecture's binary from the corresponding catalog in
  the running operator image during in-place updates, enabling the operator to
  inject the correct binary into any Pod with a supported architecture (#3840)
- Introduce initial support for tab-completion with the `cnpg` plugin for
  `kubectl` (#3875)


### Fixes

- Properly synchronize PVC group labels with those on the pods, a critical
  aspect when all pods are deleted and the operator needs to decide which Pod
  to recreate first (#3930)
- Disable `wal_sender_timeout` when cloning a replica to prevent timeout errors
  due to slow connections (#4080)
- Ensure that volume snapshots are ready before initiating recovery bootstrap
  procedures, preventing an error condition where recovery with incomplete
  backups could enter an error loop (#3663)
- Prevent an error loop when unsetting connection limits in managed roles (#3832)
- Resolve a corner case in hibernation where the instance pod has been deleted,
  but the cluster status still has the hibernation condition set to false (#3970)
- Correctly detect Google Cloud capabilities for Barman Cloud (#3931)

### Security

- Use `Role` instead of `ClusterRole` for operator permissions in OLM,
  requiring fewer privileges when installed on a per-namespace basis (#3855,
  #3990)
- Enforce fully-qualified object names in SQL queries for the PgBouncer pooler
  (#4080)

### Changes

- Follow Kubernetes recommendations to switch from client-side to server-side
  application of manifests, requiring the `--server-side` option by default
  when installing the operator (#3729).
- Set the default operand image to PostgreSQL 16.2 (#3823).

## Version 1.22.1

**Release date:** Feb 2, 2024

Enhancements:

- Tailor ephemeral volume storage in a Postgres cluster using a claim template
  through the `ephemeralVolumeSource` option (#3678)
- Introduce the `pgadmin4` command in the `cnpg` plugin for `kubectl`,
  providing a straightforward method to demonstrate connecting to a given
  database cluster and navigate its content in a local environment such as kind -
  for evaluation purposes only (#3701)
- Allow customization of PostgreSQL's ident map file via the
  `.spec.postgresql.pg_ident` stanza, through a list of user name maps (#3534)

Fixes:

- Prevent an unrecoverable issue with `pg_rewind` failing due to
  `postgresql.auto.conf` being read-only on clusters where the `ALTER SYSTEM`
  SQL command is disabled - the default (#3728)
- Proper recovery of tablespaces from volume snapshots (#3682)
- Reduce the risk of disk space shortage when using the import facility of the
  `initdb` bootstrap method, by disabling the durability settings in the PostgreSQL
  instance for the duration of the import process (#3743)
- Avoid pod restart due to erroneous resource quantity comparisons, e.g. "1 !=
  1000m"  (#3706)
- Properly escape reserved characters in `pgpass` connection fields (#3713)
- Prevent systematic rollout of pods due to considering zero and nil different
  values in `.spec.projectedVolumeTemplate.sources` (#3647)
- Ensure configuration coherence by pruning from `postgresql.auto.conf` any
  options now incorporated into `override.conf` (#3773)

## Version 1.22.0

**Release date:** Dec 21, 2023

!!! Important "Important changes from previous versions"
    This release introduces a significant change, disabling the default usage
    of the `ALTER SYSTEM` command in PostgreSQL. For users upgrading from a
    previous version who wish to retain the old behavior: please refer to the
    [upgrade documentation](../installation_upgrade.md) for detailed instructions.

Features:

- **Declarative Tablespaces**: Introducing the `tablespaces` stanza in the
  `Cluster` spec, enabling comprehensive lifecycle management of PostgreSQL
  tablespaces for enhanced vertical scalability (#3410).

- **Temporary Tablespaces**: Adding the `.spec.tablespaces[*].temporary`
  option to facilitate the utilization of a tablespace for temporary database
  operations, by incorporating the name into the `temp_tablespaces` PostgreSQL
  parameter (#3464).

Security:

- By default, TLSv1.3 is now enforced on all PostgreSQL 12 or higher
  installations. Additionally, users can configure the `ssl_ciphers`,
  `ssl_min_protocol_version`, and `ssl_max_protocol_version` GUCs (#3408).
- Integration of Docker image scanning with Dockle and Snyk to enhance security
  measures (#3300).

Enhancements:

- Improved reconciliation of external clusters (#3533).
- Introduction of the ability to enable/disable the `ALTER SYSTEM` command (#3535).
- Support for Prometheus' dynamic relabeling through the
  `podMonitorMetricRelabelings` and `podMonitorRelabelings` options in the
  `.spec.monitoring` stanza of the `Cluster` and `Pooler` resources (#3075).
- Enhanced computation of the first recoverability point and last successful
  backup by considering volume snapshots alongside object-store backups (#2940). <!-- NO 1.20 -->
- Elimination of the use of the `PGPASSFILE` environment variable when
  establishing a network connection to PostgreSQL (#3522).
- Improved `cnpg report` plugin command by collecting a cluster's PVCs (#3357).
- Enhancement of the `cnpg status` plugin command, providing information about
  managed roles, including alerts (#3310).
- Introduction of Red Hat UBI 8 container images for the operator, suitable for
  OLM deployments. <!-- NO 1.20 -->
- Connection pooler:
    - Scaling down instances of a `Pooler` resource to 0 is now possible (#3517).
    - Addition of the `cnpg.io/podRole` label with a value of 'pooler' to every
      pooler deployment, differentiating them from instance pods (#3396).

Fixes:

- Reconciliation of metadata, annotations, and labels of `PodDisruptionBudget`
  resources (#3312 and #3434).
- Reconciliation of the metadata of the managed credential secrets (#3316).
- Resolution of a bug in the backup snapshot code where an error reading the
  body would be handled as an overall error, leaving the backup process
  indefinitely stuck (#3321).
- Implicit setting of online backup with the `cnpg backup` plugin command when
  either `immediate-checkpoint` or `wait-for-archive` options are requested (#3449).
- Disabling of wal_sender_timeout when joining through pg_basebackup (#3586)
- Reloading of secrets used by external clusters (#3565)
- Connection pooler:
    - Ensuring the controller watches all secrets owned by a `Pooler` resource (#3428).
    - Reconciliation of `RoleBinding` for `Pooler` resources (#3391).
    - Reconciliation of `imagePullSecret` for `Pooler` resources (#3389).
    - Reconciliation of the service of a `Pooler` and addition of the required labels (#3349).
    - Extension of `Pooler` labels to the deployment as well, not just the pods (#3350).

Changes:

- Default operand image set to PostgreSQL 16.1 (#3270).
- The `ALTER SYSTEM` command is now disabled by default (#3545). <!-- NO 1.21, 1.20 -->
